# Introduction
I took CS3216 at NUS School of Computing in 2020. To quote from its [official website](https://www.cs3216.com/about/):
> CS3216 Software Product Engineering for Digital Markets is not your traditional software engineering course. You will not have lectures teaching you how to write in a particular programming language. You will not have assignments that assess you only for the quality of your code. You will not have a bar set for you. In fact, we don’t even know how high the bar is.
> Inspired by The Last Lecture (or "Really Achieving Your Childhood Dreams"), this course is your chance to start realising your dreams today. You will get the chance to show off your creativity to do something different.
> You are free to build almost anything under the sun.

Besides the projects I completed (which you may view under the Projects tab), throughout the course there were also lectures that exposed us to a wide range of topics related to entrepreneurship and innovation. I'll share some of my learnings from these talks in this post.

# 1: User-centric Innovation
## Lesson 1: Problem comes before a solution
Many times, developers tend to think of a seemingly innovative idea first and immediately jump into coding out a product. However, this approach may result in products that do not solve real problems at all. Instead, we should focus on identifying what is the exact problem that the user is facing before developing a solution that addresses this problem. Moreover, identifying the problem is not a straightforward process. We should not conclude what the problem is based on our own assumptions, even though sometimes the problem may seem “obvious” to our common sense. We should conduct thorough research which involves user surveys and user interviews to pinpoint the problem that the user actually wants to solve. This way, we can ensure that our product caters to the user’s needs.

## Lesson 2: The user is king
When designing a product, we should always place the user above everything else. Any features that we (developers) assume to be important but which will not be used by users should be discarded. To make sure our solution’s features closely align with the user’s needs, we should make sure to develop features that aim to solve the user’s pain points as identified by user interviews, without any redundancies. Moreover, simplicity is vital in UX and UI design. The user should ideally carry out an action with the fewest possible steps, and the user should not be overwhelmed with too much information on any single interface. For example, Su Yuen mentioned a rule of thumb that an interface should have at most three prominent features for the user. She then elaborated this point using the example of a savings app where the user’s attention is focused on one or two things on the screen only. Keeping this rule in mind helps us keep our design simple. 

## Lesson 3: Iterate, iterate and iterate
It is quite unlikely that we can get all features and designs right in the first attempt. By “getting right” I mean that the features solve the user’s most pressing needs and the design creates a smooth and pleasant experience. Therefore, it is important to get back to the users and conduct user testing using mockups to check for any shortcomings. With feedback from users, developers can then modify the low-fidelity mockups accordingly, and conduct another round of user testing. Ideally, many iterations of prototyping and user testing are needed before finalizing the design. This approach ensures that the end-product will best suit the user.

# 2: Fundamentals of Good Presentations
## Lesson 1:
Presentation skills are essential in today’s society across different professions. Regardless of whether one is promoting a product or delivering research findings, the impact that the presentation content creates on the audience depends very much on the way it is conveyed by the presenter. However, I feel that the ability to deliver good presentations is underemphasized in our computing education. There is a strong stereotype that computing students cannot do good presentations. While there is definitely some truth to this statement, it should serve as a motivation to strive for better presentation skills instead of being used as an excuse for not working hard to perfect one’s presentation skills. I hope that after listening to Prof Damith’s talk, in which he emphasized repeatedly how important good presentations are, I will put in more effort into honing these skills.
 
## Lesson 2:
Another lesson I learned from today’s lecture was that a good presentation should convey clearly to the audience a central message. This message serves as a call to action. It should prompt the audience to take action and bring about changes. Therefore, before jumping into thinking about the content of a presentation, we should set a clear vision for the objective of the presentation when we start preparing for it. After setting the central message, other things such as the actual contents should work for this central message. For example, Apple’s annual product launch presentation aims to promote its products as well as its brand. All of the elements in its presentation serve this central purpose.
 
## Lesson 3:
Last but not least, I learned that it is important to find ways to grab the audience’s attention. There are different ways to achieve it at the various stages of a presentation. To start off a presentation, the presenter can use an attention-grabbing story or unexpected fact to pique the audience’s interest in the topic. Then, the presenter can convey “what’s in it for you” to the audience, to make them feel that they stand to gain something if they follow through the presentation. During the presentation, interesting examples, anecdotes and interaction with the audience can be used to sustain attention. The presentation should end with a summary of the main takeaways and the “call to action” in order to leave a maximal impact on the audience.

# 3: Cross Platform Application Development

From Jason’s and Amulya’s talks, I gained a concise and yet comprehensive overview of the two most popular cross-platform mobile development frameworks, namely, Flutter and React Native. Compared to conventional native application development methods, cross-platform frameworks boast increased agility and development speed. This advantage comes with the nature of cross-platform development, that is only one code base is required for both iOS and Android. As a result, limited engineering effort can be concentrated on the development of a single software product, and more features can be produced per unit time. When the app goes into production, updates become much easier with cross-platform technologies. As Jason shared during the lecture, his company Blood has only three software engineers. Yet, they are able to develop and maintain a popular software product with thousands of users on both mobile platforms, thanks to Flutter.

Another takeaway from this lecture is that it is vital to choose the right tool to do the right job. Technical decisions during product development, such as whether to build a native app or a cross-platform one, come with significant trade-offs. No tool is perfect in all circumstances. We should not blindly jump into cross-platform development without asking ourselves whether it suits the application that we want to develop. Due to additional layers above the operating systems’ native code, cross-platform apps may pale in comparison to native ones in terms of performance when it comes to computationally intensive and performance sensitive tasks. Also, if an app requires many third-party libraries not supported by Flutter or React Native, it may be more convenient to start developing it using native frameworks.

Last but not least, I also learned that we don’t always have to make an either-or decision. Amulya showed us how Shopee has incorporated pure native, React Native and web elements within a single mobile application. When designing a feature, it is important to consider which technology can best fulfil its requirements. This flexibility enables Shopee to push out new features rapidly in tandem with shifting market demands, and at the same time implement “cool” AR games that perform better on native code. 

# 4: How to raise money for your start-up
Kelly's talk regarding raising money for a startup was really illuminating, as I hadn't had much knowledge in startup funding. The most important lesson I learned was that "the trend is your friend". Many times, the success of a startup doesn't depend as much on its internal strength as on external circumstances. These external factors may include whether the industry is currently experiencing or about to experience a boom, and where the startup is situated in this industry. Many startups fail nowadays because they just jump into the "ocean" without knowing where the tide is going. In this respect, having a clear and comprehensive understanding of relevant domain knowledge is more important than having superb technical expertise to build a product. Knowing the industry well is the only way to assess the trend and ride on the trend. By being at the right stage in the right trend, the product can likely attract more users and seize a larger share of the market. Consequently, investors can see the potential of the startup and may be willing to fund it.

Another lesson is that, as entrepreneurs, we have to be always ready to sell our ideas to others. Investors will only divert precious resources to a startup because they see value in it. But how would investors know whether there's value in our startup? We have to tell them and show them! There are various ways we can convince investors of our ideas, depending on the duration of the engagement. For a 30-second engagement, we will need an elevator pitch to tell a potential investor what problem our product is trying to solve, what it does and why it is better than others in a concise and attention-grabbing way. This isn't an easy task and it requires a lot of preparation and refinement. In the follow-up engagement, we may need tools such as a carefully curated set of slides and product mockups/prototypes to further convince investors to fund us. Having strong presentation and communication skills helps a lot here.

Having learned how to attract fundings, let's just go and get some money! But wait a minute, it's advisable that we defer funding acquisition as much as possible. Although sometimes it is helpful to obtain some initial funds to grow the user base quickly at the start, asking for funding too early has some undesirable consequences too. When a startup is at its infancy, its valuation is likely very low. As a result, for the same amount of funding, a larger proportion of the company needs to be sold as compared to when the company has a higher valuation. Selling too much proportion of the company may undermine the founders' motivation to further grow the company. This could disincentivise potential investors. Therefore, knowing when to seek funding is as important as knowing how to seek funding.

# 5: About Security
I found Prof Liang’s lecture on security really interesting. He started the talk by mentioning one of his favourite pastimes – repairing bicycles, in order to illustrate the most important mindset to have when dealing with information security. That is, we need to have a thorough and deep understanding of how things work so that we can find possible vulnerabilities (and subsequently fix them). As computing students, we are all familiar with building functional software products using various technologies. But we may not always pay adequate attention to ensuring the security of our products. It is not rare to hear excuses such as “we are not a billion-dollar business so no one will attack us” or “I’m not an infosec student and I don’t know anything about security”. Prof Liang demonstrated to us that we don’t need much extra knowledge to deal with security. We just need to be aware of how things work and go one step further by thinking about what possible actions a malicious agent can do. For example, he gave the example of the Web, which we all know decently well. By showing us how an attacker can inject malicious HTML and JavaScript code through a simple web form, he highlighted the importance of ensuring cybersecurity on websites.

I’ve also learned that handling user input properly can make or break an application. Many times, user inputs can be a convenient point of attack for hackers. Prof Liang did a live demo on how to inject SQL query to steal other users’ cookies. In fact, SQL injection can be very damaging, since a database usually contains all the valuable and sensitive information owned by an organisation. Therefore, it is crucial to make sure users’ inputs do not contain code that affects other parts of the system. Fortunately, many applications today already protect against such methods of hacking. As developers, we need to bear cybersecurity in mind when making products so as to conform to the current best practices for security.

Moreover, we should always keep the “KISS” principle in mind. “KISS” stands for Keep It Simple, Stupid. When two solutions solve the same problem, the simpler solution is preferred to the more complex one. This is because the more complex a system is, the more vulnerabilities it may potentially have. It may also be more challenging for developers and maintainers to identify weak points and fix them. When growing a start-up, its system may get complex really quickly. As potential entrepreneurs, we should ensure that security keeps up with development speed. It would be too late to beef up security after realising a breach has happened. It could entail huge financial losses and even affect the survival of the business. 

# 6: What is Engineering Management? Why should I care?
In yesterday’s class, David and Nishita each gave a really engaging talk on engineering management from different perspectives. Before attending the talks, I didn’t really know what engineering management entails. I’m glad that these talks have taught me so much about and beyond engineering management. There are really so many learning points I can talk about, but I’ll share the three main things I learned.

Being adaptable is an important quality that an engineering manager should possess. The current technology and market landscape is changing so rapidly that engineering teams have to be constantly ready to embrace disruptions and adjust their modus operandi to suit the company’s strategy. This requires the engineering manager to be agile and forward-looking. In ShopBack where David works as an engineering manager, the company frequently expands into new market and develops new customer experience. As a result, both the engineering team and technology infrastructure have to change to accommodate the growth of the company. New members need to be onboarded and trained, and new roles need to be assigned. On the technical side, the engineering manager also needs to spearhead the effort to do the 3Rs – Refactor, Rewrite and Retire. Being able to adapt both human resources and technical resources to align with the company’s trajectory requires much experience and foresight.

Build a strong team of individuals, instead of a team of strong individuals. This is a really powerful sentence that struck me a lot during Nishita’s sharing. Nishita recounted her experience in an adventure reality television show where she and her teammates won a race against a team comprising of individuals who might be fitter. The major reason of her team’s victory was because her team members supported and cared for one another throughout the race despite being physically less advantageous. This shows us the power of team work. When managing a group of software engineers in a project, it’s important to foster a sense of trust and collaboration between team members. They should be willing to help each other in times of need, and feel secure in the sense that they know someone will look out for them when they encounter difficulties. A team with strong team spirits can achieve much more than a group of capable individuals working in silos.

Good communication skills are essential when managing an engineering project. It is important to ensure that everyone in the team is on the same page and all the members have a clear vision of what they want to achieve. As David mentioned, ShopBack’s engineering team is scattered across multiple countries in the region. Each team is in charge of developing and maintaining part of the infrastructure. The engineering manager has a responsibility to allocate the tasks clearly between different groups of engineers so that they can work independently in various geographical regions while contributing to the same goal. Having effective communication channels between different groups is a prerequisite to proper work coordination. Also, we should learn how to give feedback appropriately. Nishita showed us how we can give constructive feedback to someone without offending them. When pointing out what someone can improve on, we should phrase it as a perception rather than a fact, empathise with them, and finally provide actionable suggestions on how to solve the problem. In this way, the person receiving the feedback can learn and grow from this experience instead of being at a loss of what to do and feeling bad about themselves.

These talks remind me of what Randy Pausch said about head fakes in his famous “The Last Lecture”. In a way, the lecture yesterday was a head fake – it’s not just about engineering management, but more importantly, it’s about how to live your life.

# 7: The CS3216 Journey
How time flies! It still takes me some time to realise that I’ve actually survived 4 projects and this semester’s CS3216 is (almost) coming to an end. Thinking back about this entire journey, I feel that I’ve learned and grown a lot. The learning came from every bit and piece of the journey, including the assignments, the people, the guest speakers, the projects and the small incidents that happened along the way. There are too many learning points to fit within this writeup, so I’ll choose what I think is my most important takeaways from this module.

Learning to learn new things is an essential skill in today’s world, and the only way to learn it is to practice it. I’m glad that throughout the course of CS3216, I was constantly thrown with new technologies and concepts to pick up. Through these experiences, I honed my ability to learn and apply new things quickly. Assignment 1 required us to go through the entire product design process. Although design thinking wasn’t entirely new to me (I took up the module Introduction to Design Thinking in Year 1), I had never applied design thinking process with such rigour in creating a software product. And I got to appreciate how user-centric product design is so essential to a product’s success, and yet it is often neglected by software engineers. I learned how to conduct proper user studies to create a user persona and ascertain user needs, and how to iterate through several cycles of mock-ups --> user testing --> gathering insights --> improved mock-ups --> … to create what users actually want. In Assignment 2, I practiced my critical thinking and presentation skills. Assignment 3 and the Final Project taught me so much about how to make a web application, specifically a Progressive Web App. Flutter, React, backend server implementation, JSON Web Token, service workers, Content Delivery Network, product marketing, funding… the list goes on and on, and each time I encountered a new concept, I had to find the most effective way to learn “just enough” so as to apply to the task at hand. Through all these assignments and projects, not only did I learn many technical skills and soft skills, but more importantly, I learned how to pick up new skills and apply them effectively.

Another thing I learned from CS3216 is that we shouldn’t focus too much on the technical aspect of “getting things done” and instead, more emphasis should be shifted to “doing the right thing”. As software engineers, sometimes we may get too engrossed in coding without questioning whether what we are coding is actually useful. It helps to take a step back and ask ourselves “will the user want the feature I’m working on?”. When we don’t know the answer, we should validate our assumptions by interviewing the users themselves. This can save us precious time and enhance the value of our product. For example, when I was working on Whoosh (a restaurant queue management app) in Assignment 3, I was about to work on implementing a PDF reader where a restaurant can upload a PDF file of their menu for customers to read while queuing. However, I took a step back and pondered: will restaurants necessarily want their menu to be in PDF format? What if they already have a website to display their menus? What if they want to show other promotional information instead? Then we realised that giving restaurants the option to place a link makes much more sense than limiting it to PDF format, and doing so saved us time in implementing something that the restaurants might not really need. Often times, it’s not about how much code is written, but what’s important is whether it serves the right purpose.

I also learned to adapt to new tasks and handle unexpected situations. This is especially relevant in the Final Project where there wasn’t a fixed structure that we had to follow. I realised that to ensure good execution in turning an idea into a real product, there are many areas to consider: user studies, marketing, design, technical considerations, and so on. In a small team, members can’t just work in silos and specialise in only one area. Everyone has to take up new roles and responsibilities when new tasks arise. For example, when doing marketing, everyone came together to brainstorm for ideas, and we split various marketing tasks amongst ourselves, such as putting up posters, drafting social media posts, maintaining social media accounts etc. There may always be unexpected things that need to be handled quickly. A really “dramatic” incident happened to our group where a man from Los Angeles claimed to own our website domain and started harassing and intimidating us on Instagram, Facebook and our email, even though we obtained the domain legally through an established domain provider. Though initially troubled by his actions, we quickly came up with a course of action and responded to him in a professional way and blocked him on social media, while informing the domain provider of the incident. Although this might be an insignificant incident in the grand scheme of things, it taught me to always expect the unexpected and adapt quickly.

I’m glad that I’ve learned so much from CS3216, and I hope that I’ll keep these lessons with me beyond the course and apply them in my future studies, work and life.  
